# Leading Ladies and Lost Revenue: A Causal Analysis of Female Representation and Box-Office Returns

#### Author: Lizzie Healy
#### Course: Georgetown DSAN 5650 - Causal Inference for Computational Social Science
#### Path: Association -> Causality

### Abstract:
This work will investigate the impact of gender bias in the film industry pertaining to economic outcomes. Specifically, it will establish a causal link between a film casting a female actress in the leading role and the resulting box-office revenue. This will be accomplished utilizing propensity weighting, which will match movies based on the perceived similarity of their characteristics. These predictor variables will include the year, season of release, genre, runtime, director and writers, star power level of the cast, MPAA rating, IMDb Metascore, IMDb Votes, number of awards won, country of release, language, film description, the production budget, the aspect ratio, the color, the countries of origin, filming locations, production companies, and tagline. To deal with the variables that are non-numeric the following steps will be taken. Firstly, a manufactured metric will be created to capture the preceived 'starpower' of the actors/actresses. Secondly, a sentiment analysis will be performed on the film description and tagline. The primary outcome variable will be the box-office number measured in US dollars, measured as the gross value worldwide. The IMDb score will be employed as an additional outcome measure to be used as a robustness check. A secondary robustness check may be employed in which the primary variable of interest will be whether the film passes the Bechdel test, indicating true female representation in the film. The initial hypothesis is that films that opt to feature a female in the leading role will experience a decrease value in the box office revenue.